When President Trump says we're done,
Israel's going to be done. And Israelis
could be disappointed at this outcome
because an agreement is not something
that Israel favors.
>> Shira Efron on how Israelis see the war
with Iran and what's at stake
politically.
>> Is the fact that there's an election
coming in Israel part of the Prime
Minister's calculation in starting this
war?
>> There is a sense in Israel that this
perpetual state of war also serves the
Prime Minister's political objectives.
This is a good reason to keep postponing
elections, especially if all polling
shows that you're not likely to win.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Michelle Hussein Show.
Once again, the headlines have been
moving fast on the Middle East. So fast
in fact that there've been times when
it's nearly impossible to work out where
the truth actually lies. One moment
there's a US threat to bomb power
plants, the next, a pivot towards a deal
with Iran.
>> But again, I'm not guaranteeing
anything.
They want to make a deal very badly.
>> Which made us think, where does all of
that unpredictability on US intentions
leave Israel?
Polling suggests that around 80% of
Israelis support the war with Iran and
that's part of what we explore in this
next conversation. It's with Shira Efron
who's been a Middle East analyst for the
last 20 years and is now distinguished
chair of Israel policy at RAND, a think
tank which gets most of its funding from
the US government and the US military. I
had heard her say on another podcast
that she's more about policy than
politics, but in this we did talk about
political leadership, about the
elections that are due in Israel later
this year, about the Mossad and Iran,
the situation in Lebanon, Gaza, and on
the West Bank. We began though with
Shira herself because I wanted to know
about the impact of these weeks of war
on her life in Tel Aviv.
>> It's lost on outside audiences
who see Israel and the US as the
aggressors here, right? And look at the
the damage that Iran is inflicting on
everyone else to forget that there is a
human dimension also in Israel
regardless of the rule in this war. I
will say it on the personal level, we
are fine, God bless. We have a bomb
shelter at home that we when we moved
into this house we never thought we
would use, but past October 7th it's
been the room most frequented in the
house by all of us. So, it's back to
routine, quite heavy hitting. We live in
the central part of Israel in Tel Aviv.
So, Tel Aviv is hit pretty frequently
around the sirens.
I have three boys who are unlike their
parents quite happy to be at home, but
it's something that they've gotten used
to, right? After COVID which the whole
world experienced and then post October
7th I I think these kids had they're
barely had school in the past 6 years.
>> But even at home it means that there are
times you hear the sirens day or night
and you're all down in the bomb shelter.
>> Yes, yes, there's a it's a pretty
functioning system, but there's a
ear-shattering scream that comes through
the phones before the sirens come to
make sure you wake up. And then about
between 6 to 10 minutes afterwards the
sirens come. We all go down to the
shelter, you wait it 10 minutes, you
hear those bombs exploding somewhere
whether it's a direct hit and it's quite
ironic, but you even hear the kids say,
"Oh, it sounds like a cluster rocket
now." Or it sounds like a direct hit. Or
maybe it's the Iron Dome interception.
Then we get out, we try to sort of
continue with our lives, but we're
mostly stranded home. We are flying, got
used to this, but but it is challenging
and there are other Israelis who are
less lucky, right? There have been
casualties, obviously, property damages
across the country.
>> Yeah. Help me understand whether Israeli
public opinion on this war has shifted
as the weeks have gone on. The most
recent polling I've seen has suggested
about 80% support for this war. Do you
sense any change in the public mood?
>> So, I think there are two things that
can be true at once. Support for the war
remains at around 80%. These are the
last polls that I've seen as well from a
variety of sources. There is a a belief
in the necessity
of this war to remove an existential
threat from Israel. And we we can debate
the merit of this argument. However,
there is a fatigue, right? People are
are home with the kids. It's very
difficult for working parents to go to
work. I think anyone who survived COVID
with kids would sympathize with this
issue. It takes a toll on the
independents,
people who own their own businesses.
Obviously, anyone who is in reserve
duty, Israel has been at war for around
900 days. I have friends who've been in
reserve duty for 800 of these days. And
there is maybe a slight decline in the
numbers in the belief that this war will
reach its objectives, which from an
Israeli perspective was supposed to
bring a toppling of the Iranian regime.
And I think this is where we see this
this slight shift and sort of
understanding, yes, this war
is necessary and it is weakening the
regime and it's degrading capabilities
that Iran has to strike Israel, but
there's a slight decline in the belief
that it will remove the threat once and
for all.
>> Yeah. But, is that also linked to the
fact that last summer Israelis were told
by Benjamin Netanyahu who at the end of
the 12-day war that the sword of of the
Iranian threat hanging over their heads
had been removed. Is there any level of
confusion at being told that last summer
and going to war again this year?
>> Oh, absolutely. And I think there's a
feeling of déjà vu. We had heard only in
June 2025 that the Iranian threat was
removed. Obviously, the US president
also said that he obliterated the
Iranian nuclear plan. So, how come
only 8 months after and the Israeli
public, unlike publics around the world,
have been ready uh for round two for a
couple of months before this round
broke. Very clearly, the question is
like, wait, if we just did it, how come
we need to do it again? And it's not
just Iran. There's a secondary front
that's turning into a primary front when
we look at the sort of Lebanon. We had
heard that Hezbollah was decimated,
right? Hezbollah is a Shiite group in
Lebanon that's also a terrorist group.
Um that Hezbollah was decimated and that
we took out its arsenal. So, in a sense,
there is um
misalignment with the the promises and
the declarations that are coming from
Israeli leadership versus reality.
And
this is I think one of the gaps that is
frustrating the Israeli public.
>> And that makes me want to ask you,
Shira, is the fact that there's an
election coming in Israel part of the
prime minister's calculation in starting
this war?
>> One of the I think the most frustrating
thing in Israel at the moment that it's
very difficult
to
disconnect anything that is happening in
this country from political motivations.
For Prime Minister Netanyahu, I want to
say um Iran has been like a religion.
For four decades, he's been speaking
about the need to remove the to to hit
the Islamic Republic of Iran. Yeah, he's
using apocalyptic terms, and he's been
using them for three to four decades,
uh, including presentations with props
of the UN that some some people
may remember. So, it is a genuine from
his perspective.
It does not mean that what he sees as
the national interest does not align
well with his political interest.
And, of course,
the reason for opening this war, the
first round in June, and then now again,
this was an operational opportunity
that we can get into. But, there is a
sense in Israel that the desire to keep
Israelis off their feet and in this
perpetual state of war also serves the
Prime Minister's political objectives,
because, first of all, it's very
difficult to go to elections when you're
in the middle of a war, right? This is a
good reason to keep postponing
elections, especially if all polling
shows that you're not likely to win.
Again,
>> Just to dig into that, you think that
could be part of the calculation, a
desire to delay the election, so there
might not be one this year?
>> It's difficult to say. There's an
indication now that the elections will
take place in time, but I I do want to
remind you that when October 7th
happened,
uh, the biggest failure, the biggest
massacre of Jews since the Holocaust,
right? The expectation expectation in
Israel was that the Prime Minister will
resign and the country will go to
election to receive a renewed mandate
from the Israeli public. That has not
happened, and the pretext for this not
happening was something that the the
coalition leadership has said all along,
"We can't go to elections when we're in
the middle of a war."
So, it is possible that the elections
will take place on time, which is going
to be somewhere in the fall this year.
It is possible, and God knows where
we're going to be there, then the
election will have to be postponed.
But also, Netanyahu himself has
portrayed himself all his life as Mr.
Security. And being in state of war
could strengthen him. We're not seeing
it in the middle polls yet, but versus
his in comparison to his contenders as
Mr. Security. And so, it serves a dual
goal even though the motivation has not
just been political. That's that's for
sure.
>> Okay. I just want to explore some of the
recent reporting about
the backdrop to the war and the thinking
in the Israeli leadership. I'm sure you
know, the New York Times was reporting
the other day that the Mossad chief went
to the prime minister with a plan and
said he believed that within days of the
war's beginning, his service would
likely be able to galvanize the Iranian
opposition, igniting riots, other acts
of rebellion that could lead to the
collapse of the regime
imminently. So, how did Mossad get it so
wrong?
>> So,
I have not seen the PowerPoint by the
Mossad. I see some reporting now that
indicates the Mossad never said this
will happen right away, that there's a
timeline issue. After strikes are
complete within I think I saw reporting
that between 6 months and a year, the
Iranian regime will will fall. And by
the way, we can think of the
counterfactual. We've seen these massive
protests in Iran in January, right? And
we also knew that Ayatollah Ali Khamenei
was going to be 87 years old soon. So,
there there is a hypothetical scenario
that even without the strikes, this
regime would fall in a year. We can
never test this, but this is sort of in
the defense of the Mossad. There's a
timeline issue that was not reported. In
that regard, you know, the sleek,
whether it came from the US or it came
from the IDF, there are a lot of there's
a lot of competition in terms of the IDF
and Mossad here and the
politicians and who wants to throw the
Mossad under the bus. But here is where
I would have expected some agency,
right, on the part of leadership. Uh
both Israel and the US to say, "Okay,
this is one idea and one option, but
what if it doesn't work?" And you can't
base decisions on um
hypothetical operational plan to topple
topple a regime. Uh my fear is that
these reports, and I'm sure they're
based on on truth and New York Times
does most serious reporting. Um
they only
would only um
how should I say I'll try to be
diplomatic. There are a lot of people
around the world who blame Israel for
dragging the US into this war.
And these reports
uh
only strengthen this narrative, which I
think for Israel is very very dangerous.
>> Dangerous because of American public
opinion?
>> Because of American public opinion first
and foremost, American legislators,
obviously. And I'm inclined to say that
whereas the Israeli uh public and the
Israeli government, Prime Minister
Netanyahu sees the international
community as between Pennsylvania Avenue
and
and Capitol Hill, uh it also matters
what public opinion is in other
countries. You know, Israel is
uh part of it's not part of Europe, but
it's uh it has the most important trade
relationships with Europe, most
investment, open skies, flying, it's
cultural initiatives, the Israeli uh
academia and R&D cannot survive without
European funding. I mean, it matters
what the world thinks, and relationships
matter. And I haven't even begun
speaking about, you know, the
neighborhood, the Middle East.
>> I mean, it's already clear that
Israel has become more divisive within
the Republican Party and the MAGA
movement, as well as within the
Democratic Party. And also there's
polling suggesting that more Americans
today are sympathetic towards the
Palestinians than than the Israelis. I I
want to ask how closely connected to
that you are, like what you really feel
when you see numbers like that, Shira,
because you were born in New York, you
moved to Israel with your parents, you
are a citizen of both countries.
>> Yes, you know, it's very
I I have no issues with having greater
sympathy for the Palestinians, right?
And I don't think it needs to be a
zero-sum game, but I will speak of the
decline of the favored views of Israelis
around the world. I think it's it's very
dangerous strategically because, first
of all, for Israel, the pillar of
defense of national security is is the
special relationship with the United
States, and I'm not sure
this relationship can be sustained.
Definitely
not with these trends that we're seeing
at the moment.
On the personal level, there's also an
issue, the relationship between Israel
and the Jewish community has been also a
pillar of Israel's strength.
And as someone who roams in both of
these communities, I often find that the
Jewish community is awfully concerned in
the US. On both sides, Republicans and
Democrats, most of the Jews in the
United States are Democrats, but on both
sides, there's a real concern for for
Israelis.
I don't think that Israelis
are fully sympathetic
to American Jews and diaspora Jews in
the same way,
and not understanding how difficult it
has been also for American Jews. And I'm
speaking of the American Jews, not just
elsewhere, because this is the community
I know the most. How short it's been for
them over the past 2 and 1/2 years,
starting after October 7, obviously,
with our protests campuses, but not only
that, rising anti-Semitism,
and being sort of associated with the
country that might have dragged the US
into war. I don't I don't buy this
narrative, but it's definitely a
narrative uh that is there, and Israel
does not understand that what it does
affects
an entire community that is connected to
Israel and is important to Israel. So,
you know, both on the strategic levels,
but also on the personal levels, it's
it's it's it's very worsen.
>> And here in the UK, where I'm speaking
to you from in the last few days,
there's been an attack on ambulances
belonging to a Jewish charity in London,
which has been chilling not only for the
for the Jewish community, but many
others watching.
>> We definitely see the rise of
anti-Semitism.
And I'm not one that thinks that any
criticism of Israeli policy is
anti-Semitism. There's a very clear
difference.
But the numbers speak for themselves.
There's a rising anti-Semitism, and it
feeds into a narrative um and in Israel,
both the policy makers and the public is
I don't see oblivious to this, but not
uh as sensitive as they need to be, not
understanding that it will backfire.
>> On the relationship with the United
States, regardless of who took whom to
war, there is something fundamentally
different that happened last summer with
the 12-day war and now that the two
countries have been part of this war
together, one that as you said, the
Israeli Prime Minister has wanted for a
long time, but this has been a joint
enterprise. What happens, do you think,
if that changes? What happens if um
Donald Trump decides to stop? And if you
look at his latest statements, there's
very little mention of Israel. He says,
"We are very willing to do a deal. I the
US is willing to do a deal with Iran."
>> Yes. Yes. So, very big I mean, I think
there is a difference between the 12-day
war and what we're seeing now,
obviously. The 12-day war,
uh the United States President Trump
gave a green light to for Israel and
after Israel cleared the sky, ended all
the work, you know, the United States
came with their immense capabilities,
um, performing the mission of Fordo and
using capabilities were developed just
for this specific mission and it was
game over. And even then, it was very
clear that even if this was portrayed as
a partnership, uh, Trump at the end of
the day did tell Israeli planes which
were in the air to strike Tehran to turn
around. And I have heard from people who
were, um, in the command center of the
Air Force where you had the chief of the
Israeli Air Force with one phone with
the pilots and another phone with the
Prime Minister Netanyahu giving them an
order in real time, you know,
"Come back, come back, come back." So,
this was an order, straight order from
the from the US president, not from the
Israeli prime minister.
What we have here is a very different
partnership. And you have Israeli Air
Force officers, uh, even senior level
and in double-digit numbers who are
stationed in CENTCOM and vice versa,
working together. But, in terms of the
decision-making, it's not a partnership.
There's one boss.
And this boss is President Trump. But,
it's very clear and Israelis across the
board, including in the defense
establishment, are saying this. When
President Trump says we're done,
Israel's going to be done.
It's not going to It's not
Lebanon or the other fronts. And
Israelis could be disappointed at this
outcome because an agreement
is not something that Israel favors.
>> So, there's no question in in your mind
Israel could not, would not continue if
the US calls it a day and and does a
deal with Iran.
>> I mean, I can't say no chance at all,
but I'll put 99.999999% that
Israel stops. And I think this is why
we're likely to see, not that the the
tempo has changed, but if you listen to
some
leaks that came out of the first days of
the war because it was unknown in Israel
how long what's going to be the duration
of this what started as an operation and
I think undeniably is a war that Israel
said we had to strike whatever we can as
fast as possible because this can be
stopped
in a moment and we would have to abide
by it. Whether Iran stops is a different
question, whether there's another round
in the future, but I think if there is a
declaration of some sort of a ceasefire
and agreement, Israel will have to abide
by it.
>> And what then happens to Lebanon?
Because that has been this other front
including with ground forces that has
opened up in the last few weeks
including the blowing up of bridges and
now the finance minister Bezalel
Smotrich saying that the Litani River in
southern Lebanon should be a new border
between Israel and Lebanon.
>> Yes.
>> Now, if that happens, that's essentially
a new occupation.
>> Right, exactly. It's probably not
likely, but I would have hoped that
whatever agreement if there is one with
Iran, it is a broader agreement that
also includes Hezbollah.
I'm not sure the US attention is there
at the moment and I do not sure Israel's
pushing for it. But absent this, what is
now a very secondary front, Lebanon,
could turn into the primary front with
Israel just digging deeper. We're seeing
targeted strikes, but we're also seeing
IDF taking more and more positions
inside Lebanon and creating de facto a
buffer zone.
It is not an occupation at the moment,
but it could turn into one absent a
diplomatic agreement. And you know,
Israel has a long history of occupying
land in Lebanon and it never delivered
the result that Israelis want. So, I'm
very concerned about this folly and I do
hope that Um, international community
and it needs to be led by the United
States, uh, sees this idea of
capitalizing on military achievements in
Iran, and the fact that the Iranians are
going to be busy and on maybe unable to
fund their proxies at the same level.
And taking advantages of really
remarkable historical trends in Lebanon,
anti-Hezbollah sentiment, and I don't
want to say welcoming of Israel, but no
longer the taboo of imagining even peace
with Israel,
there's there's really an opportunity in
Lebanon that we risk squandering now
with digging deeper, doing something
that, you know, this is the definition
of insanity, uh, doing the same thing
over and over again and expecting
different results.
Uh, this is how I see the Israeli
campaign at the moment, and no one
questions the fact that the Israeli
north, the Galilee, shouldn't be shelled
by terrorist organization on the border,
and that the Lebanese state
should do more to contain it. But Israel
has a partner in Lebanon, and if Israel
occupies parts of Lebanon, it's going to
lose the partner.
>> The Lebanese government, you mean, who
would like to see Hezbollah disarmed and
its influence brought to an end?
>> Yes, definitely it's the Lebanese
government, and we have the Lebanese
public, and, you know, the Shiite
community, which is the Hezbollah
support base, we've seen also uh,
fractures in this support base, people
representatives of the Shiite community,
they're saying, "Well, Hezbollah doesn't
represent us. They care more about the
interests of Iran than the interests of
the Lebanese." And so, um,
you know, this whole idea of disarming
terrorist organizations, it can never be
a solely military endeavor. It hasn't
worked anywhere, and where you are, with
the IRA, it's never just a kinetic
activity. It has to come with the
support There's is partner that's not
less important and this opportunity for
taking on Hezbollah politically
is available now in Lebanon. The
Lebanese government needs help. They
don't need to be squashed uh from from
the side.
>> Are are you even saying Shera that the
policy of disarming terrorist
organizations, even as you look at Gaza,
that ultimately the strategy on Hamas
has not worked and will not work?
>> As as we talk now and maybe under the
fog of war, everyone forgot where Gaza
is, but we are 5 months
in after signing a ceasefire in Gaza
that thank goodness brought the Israeli
hostages back home
and allowed the Palestinians in Gaza
some sort of respite of relief.
But as we're looking at Gaza
you have Hamas
that the faction sovereign governor of
half of Gaza, where most of the people
are.
Israel occupies the other half.
There are so many indications that Hamas
is really the governing power with arms
on the street. The Israel for 2 years
tried to disarm Hamas kinetically and it
hasn't worked. It has to come with a
political part where Palestinians will
disarm Palestinians. It has to be
something the Palestinian people choose
to do.
Now, I I do hope that after this Iran
round finishes, we can focus on Gaza
where there is a framework. We can
criticize some elements of it, but the
20-point plan that President Trump uh
delivered and then national technocratic
committee that's was to come into Gaza
and Palestinian authority that is
supposed to come back at one point
after, but none of these things have
advanced, but the opportunity still
exists and we shouldn't miss that either
because otherwise what it means is that
Israel will go back to fighting in Gaza
as well um and this could could happen
in the next few months.
>> And would that be with
uh again the the blessing of the the
Americans because there's this
little
recognized internationally body, the
Civil Military Cooperation Center, which
is essentially part of the US Army. And
that is in southern Israel. I think you
know about that organization. It's part
It's supposed to be monitoring the
ceasefire and keeping an eye on what's
happening on the ground in Gaza.
>> Yeah, I am a frequent visitor to the
CMCC and I think it's it has a lot of
advantages monitoring the ceasefire and
coordinating aid or goods that go into
Gaza. I don't know if the US is going to
bless
renewed fighting. I do think, and maybe
I hope, that President Trump sees this
as as an achievement of his foreign
policy, the pursuit of peace, and
bringing this ceasefire and creating the
structures. And I I have a lot of
appreciation for the Trump
administration. I had not thought that
they would lead
a UN Security Council resolution, that
they would be speaking about
negotiations and Palestinian right. And
I think because of pressure from the
international community they did go to
these modalities and brought them into
their framework. I'm I'm putting aside
the other criticisms of
of of issues. It all hinges now on Hamas
willing to accept a gradual disarmament
framework and following through. And
then Israel agreeing to do what it
takes. My assessment is that neither
side, not Israel, not Hamas, not the
Palestinian Authority, not the UN, no
one wants to be blamed for the derailing
this effort because it is important to
President Trump.
I am not sure that any of these parties
really want this to succeed.
And for this to succeed you need really
to make an utmost effort and that's why
the US push is very much needed because
again, there is a ceasefire, but the
fire hasn't really ceased.
>> But, I mean, share this death toll of
70,000
people, Palestinians, not including
those who might be buried under the
rubble still, including 18,000 children.
It is and at the same time to see what
is ongoing in the West Bank. And that's
not only Israeli settlers, that's also
the actions of the Israeli military. And
just one example was the shooting of a
couple and children in their car the
other day. It's an ongoing picture that
despite the fact that journalists don't
have access to many of these scenes, it
it is seen and the the images and the
accounts do travel.
>> It is so tragic
what is happening between Israelis and
Palestinians. And when we talk about
existential threats, I think this is the
existential threat for Israel, right?
When Israel was supposed to be a a
Jewish democracy.
And we have
this going on in areas that Israel
controls security-wise. I'm going to
separate the two for a moment. The Gaza
death toll is something that is still
being debated not in terms of the
numbers, but in terms of the breakdowns
of how many of these have been
militants.
But there's no question I think this is
something that Israelis
have become
numb to to see the suffering on the
other side. Children are children are
children. It does not matter if they're
the children of of terrorists, right?
They are not it's not their fault. There
is the killing and I don't believe the
IDF was engaged on purpose in
indiscriminate killing. That I know it
doesn't sound right, but there are
protocols here in terms of
opening fire, but the fact is that two
years fighting in an urban
warfare and being more risk-averse about
maybe soldiers' lives than Palestinian
lives gets to this outcome.
Where I saw, um, what what I I think and
I I wrote something about it, so
Israelis were upset that I wrote it, but
just this idea of
not being numb to the suffering of
people when you talk about humanitarian
aid, uh, making sure that people have
shelter, making sure that people have
food. And this was also something that
we saw in this war, and it's very, I
mean, when you talk about, you know, the
Jewish American in me, right? It's It's
It's against Jewish values.
And I'm saying this, and yes, of course,
of course, there were Israeli hostages
in Gaza, and of course, they were
treated in, I mean, we can't even even
imagine the suffering that they've been
through. And there was no empathy and no
sympathy among the Israelis for
Palestinians after what had happened
October 7th, the rape, maiming, and
everything that happened, but this is
where, you know, nothing justified
October 7th, but October 7th, in my
view, couldn't justify everything.
And this is where we were in Gaza. The
West Bank is almost like a separate
territory, even though it is
Palestinian.
Bezalel Smotrich, who you mentioned, uh,
when it comes to Lebanon,
is arguably, and don't hate me for
saying this, is arguably the number one
strategist in Israel at the moment.
Because he, and I'll give him credit for
it, says what he means, he writes it
black on white in Hebrew and in English,
speaks in the same language, and he, in
2017, had a manifesto where he says that
Israel will annex all the West Bank and
will transfer the Palestinian
population, and if they are not happy
with the conditions they're offered,
they're willing to fight. And basically,
under the flag of war, he's been
implementing
his vision in the West Bank, and what we
have is de facto annexation
of territory, making Palestinians' lives
miserable, and it's not maybe a
government
I don't want to say government
sponsored, but it's unchecked behavior
of I'm saying settler violence because
the violence is occurring in the West
Bank with a complete disregard for
Palestinian lives and livelihood.
>> You interviewed Mr. Smotrich, didn't
you, a few years ago when I think when
he was starting to talk about this plan.
Did you as you, you know, sat with him
at that time, did you think this is a
fantasy or did you think
he's going to make this happen?
>> Well, we spoke on the phone. He was the
Minister of Transportation then. I
thought it was a fantasy. I didn't do a
report comparing different visions for
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, you
know, including like a one-state
solution. I think around the world when
people talk about one-state solution,
they imagine the Kumbaya
equal state, equal rights for all. And
I, you know, it was very clear all back
then that a more likely one-state is the
Smotrich vision one-state, but I had
never imagined in my life that Bezalel
Smotrich, who was interrogated by the
Shin Bet for his past and involvement in
violent activities, would ever be the
Finance Minister of this country and
with a portfolio as a minister in the
Defense Ministry. He gains him the
control of the bureaucracy and so much
of it is, you probably know, Brits,
you're
so much of it is bureaucracy, the
control of the bureaucracy of of
Israel's control of the West Bank, which
he's able to do both through specific
budgets and also different structures.
So, no, I couldn't imagine.
>> Could he be Prime Minister?
>> I don't think so.
All
again, to the extent as polls are
indicative of of the outcomes, he may
not pass the electoral threshold. So,
his party may be out of the government
in the next elections when we have
elections, which is why he's rushing to
implement his vision because he's not
sure he's going to have another turn. I
I think we are not going to see him
again.
Uh and he might join forces with others.
There are all these shenanigans here to
get people back in the Knesset and the
Israeli parliament. Um but I don't think
he could be prime minister. But who
knows?
>> But haven't some of his positions become
more mainstream in Israel? Like whatever
happens to his own political future,
hasn't Israeli public as a whole been
moved more to the right, not only since
October the 7th, but before that?
>> You're exactly right. We are seeing a
shift to the right. Uh it's not that
Israelis were on the verge of a
two-state solution on October 6th, 2023,
and October 7th shattered the picture.
Um
we can trace maybe
uh Israeli shift uh to the second
Intifada, which came after a peace uh
process. Israelis felt that Ehud Barak,
you know, back then prime minister,
genuinely offered
uh gave a peace proposal to back then
Yasser Arafat, with buses exploding in
the middle of the cities that sort of
turned Israelis in thinking there is no
partner on the other side. Netanyahu
definitely fed on the no partner.
And for a long time, until October 7th,
Israelis didn't even remember there were
Palestinians around. Think about it.
Gaza was behind a behind a wall.
We saw it's a more fickle wall than than
we had assumed, but Gaza was behind a
wall. Most Israelis don't live in the
West Bank. They don't visit the West
Bank. Women get close to the West Bank.
So you live your life normally. You
pretend you're part of Europe.
You go to the US often. There's a
booming tech sector. And didn't even
remember the Palestinians to think about
taking a risk. Why? When there was no
imminent threat? And then when the
ultimate threat came, right in October
7th, sort of showed
in the most monstrous way that there are
actors on the other side. And I Hamas is
not the Palestinian Authority. Hamas is
a terrorist organization. Not all
Palestinians want to kill Israelis, but
in the Israeli mindset, that fed into a
narrative that there are no innocent
people in Gaza, propelled what we
mentioned before. This is nonsense as
you hear from Israelis.
And if we pull away from the West Bank,
the same thing that happened from Gaza
will happen. And that's closer to Tel
Aviv, and closer to the airport, and
closer to Jerusalem. And God forbid we
could do this, we can never have them
independent, and we can never withdraw.
And this is something that's sinking.
And I do hope
it will take some time for the Israelis
to to think there's another way, but I
do hope there will also be leadership
that presents this alternative vision,
because one of the tragedies is it's not
just Netanyahu, also from the opposition
leaders,
you don't hear the vision of
separating peacefully from the
Palestinians, understanding that there's
a partner on the other side, not an
ideal partner, but there's a partner on
the other side. The vast majority of
Palestinians do not want to wake up in
the morning and kill Jews,
right? Israelis don't hear that, and
they should hear this from leadership.
It shouldn't come from the public to
tell the leadership what to do. That's
not how leadership's supposed to work.
>> But it would be a brave leader, wouldn't
it, who stood up and said, "Palestinians
have rights too. Just as Israel has a
right to exist, Palestine should have a
right to exist."
>> It's a very brave Israeli position to
take today, and I don't think anyone
will take it.
And the the tragedy of thing across
Israelis and Palestinians is that it's
portrayed as a zero-sum game, and it's
not, right? Your right to
self-determination does not negate the
others.
And it's a small piece of land, but it
frankly There's some polling on this.
Most Israelis, and definitely most
Palestinians, but most Israelis don't
care about one hilltop somewhere where
they don't even know where it is, closer
to the border with Jordan. They only
want to wake up in the morning and feel
safe.
And Palestinians want to feel safe, too.
And, you know, it's easier for me to
speak about the lack of uh Israeli
leadership that presents this vision,
but we haven't had a good vision on
Palestinian side, either, right? A
Palestinian leader that comes and tells
their people,
"We live with the Israelis. Most of the
Israelis don't want to kill us.
Uh we accept there was war, and we're
probably not going to return to our
homes in Haifa and in Tel Aviv, but we
will have a state, and we will coexist."
And claim responsibility and offer a
vision that, frankly, before speaking to
the Israelis, dignifies the Palestinians
with with with efficient services that
they deserve. They They deserve better
leadership, too.
>> To close, Shira, can I ask you to think
ahead to 2028? It'll be the year of
Israel's 80th birthday.
It will also be, by the end of the year,
a time with a new president coming into
the White House in the United States.
What do you think Israel will look like
by then? What do you think Israel-US
relations will look like by then?
>> You know, I do want to be optimistic
because I can't um I can't stress how
important the next Israeli elections
are. And we only in our group of
friends,
the very few who are still in Israel
because so many of them have left the
country in the past few years,
as a direct result of the policies of
the Israeli government, but so many of
the others that have left are holding
their passports in hand and not making
decisions about changing house and
stuff, just waiting for the outcome of
this election.
If there's a different government in
Israel,
maybe not the ideal government, but a
different government that sees the
benefits of the country, all of the
country, not just the settler and the
Haredi population, right? The sectors
that they support, and sees as a
priority to first of all I'm not saying
that think going to
I I doubt we're going to see a
Palestinian state, but there's going to
be a complete stop to settler violence
and complete halt to the damaging trends
and leadership that improves
relationship with Israel's neighbors and
that sees the Jewish community and sees
the need to improve relationship with
Europe, which is really
a big priority issue also for Israel. I
think
Israeli US ties can can can uh sustain
this also and we're going to see a
shift. Uh we're not past the Rubicon in
a sense that I think it's it's it's a
lost cause.
However,
uh if the elections uh bring us a
coalition government that is served what
we're seeing today, which is which is
unlikely and all polling shows that this
coalition is not going to come to being
again.
Um it's going to be very very difficult
to convince the world that there's needs
to be a separation between the Israeli
government and the Israeli public.
>> Shira Efron, thank you very much.
>> Thank you, Michelle. Thank you for
having me.